---
title: "The Fibonacci Sequence from lgatto"
permalink: /posts/R_lgatto/
tags: 
  - R
  - Programming
comments: true
toc: true
toc_label: "ON THIS PAGE"
toc_icon: "file-alt"
sidebar:
  nav: "posts"
---

Here's another
[post inspired by some python code](http://lgatto.github.io/curse-dimensionality/),
this time about
[the Fibonacci sequence by Stuart Mumford](http://www.stuartmumford.uk/blog/the-fibonacci-sequence.html).

I won't be replicating the Python code here, as the first version,
that dynamically grows the sequence would be horribly slow in R, and
others don't apply directly. 

Here's a plain implementation that first initialises the results
variable `res` before applying the Fibonacci formula `F[i] = F[i-1] + F[i-2]`.

```
fib <- function(n) {
    res <- c(1, 1, numeric(n-2))
    for (i in 3:length(res))
        res[i] <- res[i-1] + res[i-2]
    return(res)}
```
Let's now benchmark the function for `n = 1000` numbers.

```
n <- 1000
library(microbenchmark)
(tm1 <- microbenchmark(fib(n)))
```

About `r round(median(tm1$time)/1e6, 3)` milliseconds. Not great, but
reasonable. We'll compare these timings with python later.

## Byte compiling

The first optimisation we can do is to byte compile the `fib` function
using the `cmpfun` function from the `compiler` package.

```
library(compiler)
cmpfib <- cmpfun(fib)
(tm2 <- microbenchmark(cmpfib(n)))
```

We improve the median timing by `r round(median(tm1$time)/median(tm2$time), 0)`
fold and reach `r round(median(tm2$time)/1e3, 2)` microseconds.
That's a neat improvement for very little extra effort (but note
that, in my experience, byte compiling will not always give such
benefits, is any).

## Using Rcpp

The famous [`Rcpp`](http://rcpp.org/) package is of course the way to
go when efficiency is key. The package is nowadays so mature, well
documented and has such a clean R/C++ interface and elegant
[syntactic sugar](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/Rcpp/vignettes/Rcpp-sugar.pdf),
that the overhead of calling C/C++ has become substantially smaller
and certainly worth the extra effort.
